Here we outline an explanation for why segregation variance increases faster-than-linearly with the angle of divergence, theta (Fig. 3A). Since segregation variance can only arise from non-parallel genetic evolution, this is equivalent to explaining why the extent of non-parallel genetic adaptation increases faster-than-linearly with the angle of divergence.

Our explanation focuses on the extent of phenotypic space that has a higher fitness than the mean phenotype of both adapting populations at the time they are founded. At the time of founding both adapting populations are expected to have the same mean phenotype, which is the mean ancestral phenotype. Mutations that move this ancestral mean phenotype into the region that has higher fitness in both parental environments are thus mutually beneficial (at least when phenotypes are sufficiently clustered around the mean). The region of phenotypic space that has higher fitness than the mean in one environment is a hypersphere (of dimension m) centred on the optimum with a radius equal to the distance between the mean phenotype and the optimum. A second hypersphere describes the phenotypic space that has higher fitness than the mean phenotype in the other environment. The region that is mutually-beneficial is then the intersection of two hyperspheres, referred to as a hyperspherical cap.

Fortunately the volume of a hyperspherical cap is known for any dimension m (Li 2011). It depends on the dimension, the radii of the two hyperspheres, and the distance between their centres. In our case the radii are equivalent and equal to d (the distance between the mean ancestral phenotype and the optima) and the distance between the two centres is delta = d sqrt(2(1-cos(theta))). Thus the amount of phenotypic space that is mutually beneficial can be written as a function of m, d, and theta. The amount of phenotypic space that is beneficial in a given environment is just the volume of one of the hyperspheres. Dividing the volume of the mutually-beneficial space by the volume of the space beneficial in a given environment gives

BetaRegularized[Cos[theta/2]^2, (1 + m)/2, 1/2] (eq A1)

which depends on only m and theta, i.e., it is independent of d, the distance from the ancestor to the new optima. We refer to eq A1 as the fraction of overlap, and one minus A1 as the fraction of non-overlap. 

The fraction of non-overlap (one minus A1) exhibits a faster-than-linear increase with theta for all values of m>0, and the increase is faster for greater values of m (Fig. 3b). Thus if standing genetic variation was uniformly distributed throughout the beneficial hyperspheres, the percent of segregating mutations that were mutually beneficial, and thus expected to fix, in both adapting populations at the onset of adaptation would decrease faster than linearly with the angle of divergence. 

In reality and in the simulations, the standing genetic variation is not uniformly distributed, the probability of fixation varies across the region of overlap, and adaptation proceeds such that the fraction of overlap thus calculated no longer describes the fraction of mutually beneficial mutations. Taking the first two complications into account would require weighted averages across the hyperspherical cap, which is beyond the scope of this article. The third complication could be accounted for by shifting the mean phenotypes back to the mean ancestral phenotype and shifting the two optima similarly. The (weighted) fraction of overlap would once again capture mutations that are be mutually-beneficial, but one would also have to account for a change in the distribution of the standing genetic variance caused by the fixation of mutations during adaptation. This is also beyond the scope of this article. Despite these complications, we believe the simple analysis above qualitatively capture the essence of the reason why segregation variance increases faster-than-linearly with the angle of divergence.